I was starting to ask, what are the, what
contributes to Aggie spirit? This feeling of
warmth and affection and respect that so many
people, students, faculty, staff, and others
have in school. What is it that builds that?
I think that in my own instance, I think it was the
core of cadets. I remember that it became apparent
to me that, and I was also brought to my attention
several times, that you are not important as C
Company infantry. The important thing is see
infantry, what it is like, what it does. And you
have an obligation to know every man in the
company, which as a freshman I proceeded to
memorize the names of every person and their
hometown. If you didn't If you couldn't give the
hometown, you might have it spelled out in a very
emphatic manner.
Also, you know, I worried about this at first,
Haskell, because it seemed like you were
criticized everything you did. And I was getting
very discouraged. And then I was surprised to find
out by watching that this sophomore said that to
everyone. So then I began to get the feel of this
thing. It was a learning to live together and to
make your contribution. Now, also, you did not
have to like someone. You simply needed to know how
to work with someone and to
be courteous, even though you didn't like the
language of the person. Well, all right, but you
accept the man as being a part of your unit. We did
things together. And I noticed that today, out on
the campus, they have tremendous organization
that you can belong to. But it is, and also,
Haskell, we took care of each other.
I noticed this when I was director of the
counseling center. If you have someone in your
dormitory that obviously is sick, you see that
they get to the hospital. All right, now I was going
to say, you were saying that for you it was the core.
But later, in the 50s, 60s, 70s, you as a
professional must have seen this transcend the
core because there were so many who were not in it.
And so that had to be greater. I had a grandson who
came here in 1988. It was a history maybe. Tim. Tim
lived in Puryear Hall. Now Puryear Hall was not
what I used to call non-reg. But they had their own
organization. They had certain leaders that were
designated. And they did things together. One of
the things that also contributes to this over the
years has been the intramural program. We have for
many years, to my knowledge, had the most
extensive intramural program in the United
States. Well, that puts young men, they run
together, they play together, And this builds up a
unity. And it
has tradition. Now some profs come down here from
east or west or somewhere, and that's the first
thing they want to eliminate, are the traditions.
Well, my experience has been that if you have that
faculty member stay five, six, seven years, he
begins to change. So Haskell, whatever it is, eats
on the professor just as it does on the student. I
think it's a wonderful thing. In this
inclusiveness,
How much did it matter about the students' family
wealth, ancestry, national background, et
cetera? Oh, that's an interesting point. I don't
think it makes any. I sensed this the first week I
was here. It's remarkable. And it was even so that I
had some friends who were very well-off. But you
would never know it, because we all did things
together. No one tried to show off with this, that,
or the other. I think that
if some way they could devise a method to allow a
student to retain his heritage, retain his
characteristics, but learn to live with others
and go ahead with your, well, your interests. I was
flabbergasted here a few weeks ago to see over
television. This is at the University of
Virginia. I was only on the campus of the
University of Virginia for two days. and I was
deeply impressed with their honor system. This
was related to the black students and this fellow
who was interviewing them was thrown completely
off balance because
they said we want what our rights are as it relates
to the functioning of living, getting
instruction, but we want to be with our own. And
they had their own tables at the dining hall. They
said, we feel more comfortable this way. And they
in effect were saying, I'm not eating to win
friends and influence people. I'm eating because
I'm with people that I am like.
We can live together. We can work together. The
military does this. I mean, when you get into the
Navy or whatever it is, you have strong
differences, but there are times when it's time to
put it all together. To me, one of A&N's many
strengths is that okay, so you grew up in the
country and I didn't, so what? Or, so you happen to
be Germanic in ancestry and I happen to be Dutch, so
what? Let's see if we can work this math problem
together, or let's see if we can share whatever
else. And it was this inclusiveness, which...
that if you're an Aggie, that's all that matters,
if you're one of us. And if you're not, then the old
thing of highway six runs both ways was the answer.
If you don't like it, well, keep going. All right.
Or within the Corps or without of the Corps, are
there certain events where people share the
experience that you think helped to pull Aggies
together? Well, I feel that one thing, it's
interesting. We have all the differences in the
world, but when we get out on Kyle Field and we're
playing football, for example, the people They
are together. Even the alumni. There's a
commonality. And it's remarkable. People are
flabbergasted at how many people attend Ireland.
What about, have you got a time commitment? No, no,
but Melba wants us to take a break.
Let's jump to 1970. Mr.
Rutter dies early that year. Jack Williams comes
November the 1st. Do you remember your first
impressions of him? Well, yes, I do. But I think I
may have commented on this. My first meeting with
President Wheeler was the, he asked that we come
down to his office, Jack Dobson, director of the
A&M adjunct. Myself, who was the administrative
person that, well, would answer to you or to a
proper person as to how the program was doing and
all that sort of thing. And then we took Dean
Maxwell with us because the courses tended to be in
his college. And Maxwell didn't have much to say
until we were walking and got about halfway down to
the system building and he said,
President Williams, but he said, I don't know why
you're doing it. He said the A&M adjunct has been
given to Texas Tech and they're going to take over
the first of June. Well, we had about almost
filled for the first six weeks and a great number
for the second six weeks. And it was a very awkward
situation. Well, we got to President Williams'
office and he commented that he was interested in
the program. And we faced this issue then, what are
we going to do? We have all these people who have
sent their money in. And President Williams
called in Bob Cherry, the secretary, to the board.
And Bob explained that that had been worked out by
tech. And that was what they had said they wanted to
do. But they also though recognized the dilemma
and they had a telephone meeting of the board and
changed the closing date to the 1st of September.
President Williams was, he asked a lot of
questions. He was very much at ease, very
interested in the program. And I
felt that we had a very competent man here.
I was the university's representative to the
college board. Bob Logan was the second one
because of his scholarships and loans. We
tried to keep President Williams informed, and I
think we did. But I had this experience with
President Williams. He wrote me and said, I want
you to write me a letter explaining how you feel
about the
scholarship program where it is restricted
completely with financial need and
is that the best way for us to go? Well, of course,
under Bob Logan's leadership, the president's
scholars were chosen basically on potential and
what they demonstrated they had done. And I backed
this. I think that there are other ways they could
have designated those loans to people who were in
need. But I hesitated at the word scholarship. But
I got this letter from President Williams who
said, please write me this. So I wrote back and
said, Mr. Bob Logan, who heads up this work in the
scholarships and loans, much better qualified
than I. And I
did not want to presume on Bob Logan's field. Well,
I sent the letter. Well, in about three days, I got
this letter back. And he said, I'm well acquainted
with Mr. Bob Logan and his work. But he said, that is
not what I asked you. I asked you to tell me what you
thought. And he said, I persist that you write me
this letter. Well, I did. I did. And I frankly think
that President Williams had somewhat the same
feelings. I know Wayne Hall backed me on this.
Well,
President Williams,
later, he was on the board of the college entrance
examination board. And I felt a little
awkwardness about the president of the
university
Well, Haskell, I didn't know how to handle it. It's
kind of like a sergeant visiting with a major. But,
you know, I think he knew that. And he's a great
tease, you know. But I saw him later, after he left.
I think he went to Houston. Mm-hmm. And he had come
for some reason to a College Board meeting in San
Antonio and he grabbed me and he was a very warm
person. But I would imagine that if you
lollygagged around or you pulled some stupid
stunt, it would be an entirely different
relationship. Soon after he got here, Horace
Byers retired and John Calhoun became the new
chief academic officer. Describe any
interaction you had with him and any evaluation
you had with him. Well, you know, with Dr. Byers?
No, well, Byers and then Calhoun. Well, there was
an interesting thing that happened about that.
Dr. Byers admitted to me, he said, I may have made an
error in judgment there, and I should have had your
center as one of the places that Dr. Calhoun would
be taken and given an orientation. And he said, I'm
sorry, but I didn't make any mention. Well, my
feeling was that Dr. Calhoun really didn't know
may not have known that this organization was
under him. And I want to tell you that one of the most
pleasant interviews I've had was the day you came
by. And you told me, I knew you, but you told me what
your relationship was and some things about could
you do this and could you do that. And for the first
time, I felt that I had an academic person who
understood what we were trying to do in the field of
dialogue. And Haskell, that was a warm feeling.
Now in those years, in the Williams-Calhoun
years, the counseling, was it counseling and
testing? What was the center called? It was called
the Academic Counseling Center. Academic
Counseling Center. It reported to whom in those
years? To Dr. Barr. But directly to him? Yes. Okay,
all right. And then under Calhoun, same way? Yes,
sir. Okay. Mm-hmm. And the staff, by and large,
included whom in that period of time? In that
period of time,
there was myself and Dr. Hope. But Dr. Hope,
though, was later taken by Dean Huber as associate
dean. And Dr. Sarah Jones took over. and was a very
capable clinical psychologist. Very, very
capable. Had Ulrich Kroll. We had this young man,
Ronald Lewis, who got his PhD, and he now has his own
counseling center out away from the university.
He's done quite well.
We had a small staff, to be honest with you. I
sometimes wonder how in the world we got to work
that. Share with this record, what was a typical
day's effort like? What did day in and day out, what
did the center do? One of the things that I tried to
do was to gear our work in such a way that there would
be periods when we would emphasize certain
things. Like in the summer months would be
bringing
in the small groups of students, processing them,
and getting them out. Now, of course, when we open
school, then we could put our energy into a
different activity. And that would be, say,
academic counseling.
As
we got into the fall, then there would be the
problems of...
Well, we did a lot of vocational counseling. And it
was a good contribution. People like Dr. Howard
Gravitt. Dr. Gravitt kept a very close eye on his
pre-meds and pre-dental students. If in the
sophomore year they were having difficulty, then
Dr. Gravitt would arrange for the student to come
over to us. And we would try to answer what are the
causing, what's causing these things. We, in many
instances, we were able to divert the student into
choosing a field related to the medical field, but
not the doctor of medicine. Bob Cochran, Dr.
Cochran was a person who kept a close eye on his
nuclear engineering student. If it appeared in
the sophomore year that they were not handling the
background work, then Dr. Cochran would call me
and send the student over. Well, when these things
happened, we simply tried to help the student look
at the options. and to have them choose. As far as
Dr. Gravitt or Dr. Cochran was concerned, we tried
to write them a letter which would answer these
questions, but would not
break the confidence thing. We also, we served in
institutional research Actually, when that
concept first came out, no one in the college
wanted it. And they'd send the material to the
counseling center. And Lannis Hope did a lot of
work on that. We tried to keep our college's, our
university's image with those college
universities over the country that were doing
institutional research. We did some
institutional research. We did, we couldn't do a
whole lot, but we did enough that it was,
correlation studies would be helpful in planning
what is to be done. Also, Dr. Wayne Hall called me
over and said, Austin, we are not getting a good
measure of the quality of our product. And I want
you to come up with something that will make it
possible for us to make some judgments. So I
thought about it, I read, I looked around, and I
found that the graduate record examinations had
an advanced test, and that you could rent old
copies of that.
So we tried this out, we gave the students the test.
And we were really surprised at the relationship
between the test and the program that they were
going through. So I suggested to Dr. Hall that we
add the GRE aptitude test and the appropriate
advanced tests to the testing program of
graduating seniors. Dr. Hall said, well, we'll
have to handle that carefully. And what we did was
we told the seniors that this is a requirement for
graduation. Texas A&M University will pay for it.
It will not cost you anything. You may have the
scores for your own personal use. And we pointed
out that in some instances, the GRE test could be
used in lieu of the civil service examination. We
had resistance. Students like to resist. But we
were all capable people. And we handled that all
right. Did you find a correlation between the
grades they had earned, their general grade
average, and the GRE? Yes. We found some
stimulating things. By the way, there was a,
I think that Bill Carter, one of our graduate
students, wrote his dissertation on this. What we
found was that, first, we were a much stronger
university in terms of our product than we had
imagined. We're using a thousand as the base for
graduate study. Half of the graduating class of
Texas A&M University would be eligible for
graduate study to first class places. Then we took
the advanced test and we got normative data on
those tests from the GRE people. And for instance,
in biology,
the mean score for our students would put them in
the 84th percentile of the national. Very good.
Very good. Economics was the same way.
Engineering did well. Now math, math did not. So
Wayne Hall says, we've got to find out why. So he
calls in from Baton Rouge, I believe, a fellow who
was recognized in his field of math teaching. And
he stayed with us two days. And he said, well,
Rennie, you're not in as bad a shape as it appears.
He said, first, you do not have a thorough
undergraduate program of math for math majors.
You're spending all your time as subsidiary
courses for other colleges. He said also you must
strengthen your math courses in the
undergraduate program because the students must
have material that will give them that
background. So the math department went to work. I
want to point out here is that in all of my work I
tried to place it in such a way that the faculty
would use it. I was not telling them what to do. It
was to give them information. For instance, when
we were considering these things, we had every
department on the campus send three professors
over. And they sat in the room we set up for this. And
they studied the test thoroughly. And they made
the decision whether or not